TO BE FINISHED - For now, please ignore this file because it is currently not final and will be updated if time is avialable.

Detailed Methodology
Self-Record Attendance System

Methodology Contents
1. Implementation of Core Features
  1.1 Log in and Log Out
    1.1.1 Log In
    1.1.2 Log Out
    1.1.3 Account Creation (Sign Up)
  1.2 Attendance Features
    1.2.1 Create Attendance
    1.2.2 View Attendance/s
    1.2.3 Fill Out Attendance
2. Technologies Used (with justification)
  2.1 Python
  2.2 Tkinter
  2.3 bcrypt (Additionally known as Blowfish crypt)
  2.4 SQLite
3. Backend-frontend communication
  3.1 Tkinter (Frontend)
  3.2 Python (Backend)
  3.3 SQLite (Storage)
4. Key Design decisions or Trade-offs
  4.1 Manual Date and Time Input
  4.2 Single-file Architecture
  4.3 Pop-up validation messages
  4.4 Database Usage (SQLite)
5. References to Ethical Considerations in Programming Choices
  5.1 User Privacy
  5.2 Data Minimization
  5.3 Accessibility
6. References 

Methodology

1. Implementation of Core Features
The following content in Section 1 of the methodology contains how were the features of the Self-Record Attendance System were implementated. 
Currently, there are three main features made: user authentication feature, atendance Feature, and system time feature. Note that these aren't the only features of the program
1.1 Log in and Log Out
1.1.1 Log in

The login system of the program was implemented using an account name and hashed password system. A login system was used instead of directly showing the user the main menu in order to implement current user session tracking. The current user tracking is implemented to prevent users from falsifying attendance record through impersonation of another user.

When the user presses log in, the login system checks whether there are empty inputted login credentials. If there empty credentials, the user would be notified about it with a pop-up message, and will be asked to enter the missing login credentials/s. Next, the program checks if the entered login credentials appear in the USERS table in the database. 

If the entered account name is not stored in the USERS table, the program notifies the user about it and asks user to reenter login credentials. The comparison of whether the account name is stored in the USERS table is case-insensitive.

If the entered account name is found, the login system checks if the entered password corresponds to the stored, hashed password in the USERS table in the database. If the user did not enter their account password, the program would notify the user about it. Otherwise, the program proceeds, and uses bcrypt.checkpw() to check verify whether the entered account password matches with the entered account name.

bcrypt.checkpw() is used because when the user signs up, their password is hashed and salted and stored in the USERS table to prevent data breach of account passwords and prevent rainbow-table attacks if someone were to gain unauthorized access to the attendance database.

bcrypt.checkpw() works by taking in the following arguments as follows:

bcrypt.checkpw(plain_string, hashed_string)

The bcrypt.checkpw() hashes the plain string and uses the salt from the hashed string. If both of the salted and hashed strings match, then the user successfully logs in, and is shown the main menu of the program. The program additionally tracks who is the current user. Otherwise, the program informs the user that the password is incorrect.

1.1.2 Log Out

In the main menu of the program, the user can click "log out" to log out of the program. When they do so, they are asked first, to confirm that they intend to logout. This is to prevent accidental log out, and make the user enter their login credentials again. If the user clicks "Yes" in the log out confirm prompt, then they would log out and be shown the login menu. Otherwise, if the user clicks "No", then they would be shown the attendance menu, and nothing happens.

1.1.3 Sign Up

A sign up system and sub-feature was implemented for the login and log out feature because of two main reasons:

1. Manually adding users would take significant time, especially because you need to use hashed passwords.
2. Manually adding users would not scale well with tens or hundreds of users.

The sign up feature works by taking in what the user has entered when they entered an account name and an account password. First, the sign up system checks if the user has entered empty sign up credentials, and informs the user about it if there are. Then, the program checks if the entered sign up credentials match the requirements stated in the log in menu

Account Name: Only Letters and Spaces (Spaces by themself will not be accepted, as it can confuse users when the an non-named user submits attendance, and the submission in View Attendances shows their name as whitspace)

Password: At least 10 characters

If the entered sign up details do not match the specifications, then the user is informed about it and is asked to change their sign up details. Otherwise, the sign up system accepts the account name, hashes and salts the entered account password through bcrypt, inserts the sign up credentials in the USERS table, and prompts the user that they successfully signed up.