Project title: Self-record Attendance System  

Problem Statement: 
  When it comes to attendance, there is still a use of manual and automated attendance tracking. Though it has reasonable efficiency, issues still arise from it. For attendance involving
manual tracking, this method of attendance over relies on one or more people to check the attendance. On the other hand, the automated attendance in our campus such as the QR scanner/terminal can be considered automated and faster, but one terminal can only accommodate one student at a time. Even if there were multiple terminals, its unsurprising that there would still be lines of students waiting.

Example 1: On November 21, 2025, specifically during Noise vs. Voice Talk Attendance
During attendance, there was “signing your signature next to your name in a batch list”. Functional, but considering there are a lot of students, student body going there, plus potential delays due to technical difficulties or some arrived late, then you get a time delay which delayed the program schedule

Example 2: Role of Homeroom / Class Adviser in Student’s attendance (Based on the PSHSS CIM 7.0 Student’s Attendance V2_Rev1.pdf)
The Homeroom/Class adviser has to check and combine the attendance of all students and reflect on their report card (File reports to SCO if needed). Additionally, the Homeroom / Class Adviser needs to submit two copies of the filled out Record on Attendance and Punctuality to the Homeroom Unit Coordinator. Considering the number of days the attendance of students is required, it may be tedious to do these processes.
  
  For this automated attendance system project, we will attempt to make an attendance system that addresses the following issues said earlier, ideally by allowing one to record their 
attendance and send it to the person handling it. However, features will be needed to avoid dishonest attendance recording. That way, the 
finished project would have less loopholes and prevent academic dishonesty
--------
Notes:
1. Essentially, the last sentence is saying that we’re trying to avoid a “false positive/false negative” in a student’s attendance, specifically those who are recorded as “Present” when they’re actually not.

2. We are intending to add a feature/s such that before you can even record yourself "Present", you would be asked some way to prove you were actually present. Specifically, the attendance would have an assigned password (While making the attedance, the person who's creating would first need to assign it a passowrd.) This password would be the main way to prove your actually present.

How this would look like for a user point of view (take for examlpe - student):
While trying to record yourself present, the attendance recorder would ask the user what is the assigned password to this attendance recorder. From this point, the student would not be able to record themselves present unless someone else told them what it was (which is the person who created the attendance such as the teacher). The teacher may disclose this password to students who are present.

It should be noted that this main point wouldn't completely guarantee integrity since the info of the new passwords can still be relayed to those aren't actually present (such as via messenger). To solve this, the self-record attendance will ask the user to submit something that allows it to countercheck their attendance (such as an image of them at the area)

Measures for data integrity:
PIN/Password – Can be disclosed by the one facilitating the attendance; main way to check who’s there
Counter Checking – Will ask user a way to counter check their attendance / prove their actually there
Account – Whoever’s account is currently used will be reflected of for the attendance report once you filled out the attendance
Required Fields – Attendance can ask for other things/info if needed. 
System Time – will be used to check when the user has recorded their attendance. Based on the time, it will be used to check the attendance status of the user. The user who created the attendance will specify when the time of recording of attendance is tardy, absent, cutting, etc. 


Project Objectives:
•	Allow students to record their attendance instead of relying on a single person/terminal to do so. (Generally by classes or time(s)/date(s) that aren't durning classes but still require student's attendance such as SALINLAHI 2025)
•	Consider input/output validation in attendance system to prevent dishonest attendance recording (Data Integrity)

Planned Features: 
• Log in and log out program feature
•	Option to (create/check, record) an attendance
•	System time utilization for checking attendance
•	Settings feature

Note for 3rd feature:
1. It will be included in the 2nd feature
2. Note for 3rd feature: Since you are the one to record your own attendance, the time you do so will be important to check if you're tardy/cutting/absent for a required student attendance and by how long. For when will the attendance consider the user tardy or absent, the one who created it will specify it in their attendance
As example (only):
Without Self-record attendance system: 
If you were late to a class by 14 minutes: You would be marked 14 minutes late in Daily Attendance Sheet
With Self-record attendance system: 
If you recorded your attendance, the attendance will get the current time to check if your record is past the indicated tary/absent mark. If yes (tardy), your recording will include how long you were tardy for (such as in minutes). If instead the the current time meets the absent mark, your attendance would be marked "Absent".

Planned Inputs and Outputs:
1.
(User) Input: Opens Program
(Program) Output:
• Asks user for account name and password

2a.
(User) Input: Successfully logging into the program
(Program) Output:
• Displays attendnce tracking options, account settings, and log out option.
• Display current time 

2b.
(User) Input: Inputs invalid account name or password
(Program) Output:
• Display "Invalid account name or password. Please try again."

3.
(User) Input: Chooses the option to create an attendance
(Program) Output:
• Asks user to enter attendance name, when to start and stop consider attendance submissions as "Present", and method of attendance (e.g, pin/password).
(Example for start and stop checking attendance format: MM, DD, YYYY, from [Start Time] to [End Time]
• Additionally asks user whether they want to modify attendance
• Show user a preview of what their attendance trakcer (for attendee point of view)

4.
(User) Input: Checking attendances (Made by the user)
(Program) Output:
If user hasn't made any attendances:
  • Program displays "No current attendance  s you've made.
Otherwise:
  • Program displays current attendances made by user

5.
(User) Input: Checks overview of attendance  
(Program) Output:
Program displays the following:
• Attendance   status (Not started, Ongoing, Ended)
• Attendee entries and info (e.g, account name, time of attendance tracked)
• Option to give comments from attendee entries and change attendees' status

6.
(User) Input: Records their attendance for an attendence
(Program) Output:
• First, the program asks user for the attendance name (Case-sensitive).
  If name isn't valid:
    • Program displays "Name not valid. Please try again."
  If name is correct, but...
    Attendance tracking hasn't started:
      • Program displays "Attendance hasn't started yet. Try again later."
    Attendance tracking is no longer accepting "Present" attendance submissions:
      • Program displays fields/required entries from attendance owner but will be reflected as "Tardy."
Else:
• Program displays fields/required entries from attendance owner and will be reflected as "Present."

7. 
(Program) Output: Asks user a way to countercheck their attemdamce (Example: image of being in the area)
(User) Input: Inputs way to countercheck their attendance

8.
(User) Input: Selects Account settings on main page:
(Program) Output:
Program displays the following:
  • Change account password 
  • Manage Attendance Record History
  • Time Format
  • Appearances

9.
(User) Input: Selects to log out
(Program) Output:
Program displays "Session ended."
Program asks if user wants to log in back.
